# About

Meeting to dance in the night, flying through the sky with crows or perched on stems of ragwort, causing mischief or kidnapping children-- these are all traits which both the fairies and later witches of Scotland became know for. Upon being asked to explore the [Survey of Scottish Witchcraft](http://www.shca.ed.ac.uk/Research/witches/) along with my classmates for a seminar, and the subsequent collective observation and surprised discussion of "Fairy" being included as a characterisation of Scottish witch trials, I wondered, *"Could beliefs about creatures such as fairies and elves established prior to the Scottish witch trials have influenced their notions of witchcraft and the devil?"*

This project was created to examine that question through analyzing the content of the Survey of Scottish Witchcraft Database, alongside additional primary and secondary sources that together reveal how beliefs surrounding fairies, elves, witchcraft, and religion intersected during the Early Modern period of Scotland. In seeking points of entanglement amongst these topics through both close readings and visualizing data from the database by using digital mediums such as text analysis and mapping, I was able to look at how the Scottish witch was crafted through traditional understanding of fairies and newly introduced religious ideal at both the microscope and macroscope in Early Modern Scotland.

Note: For definitions of terms relating to these topics, please use [the glossary](http://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.glossary) compiled by the creators of the Survey of Scottish Witchcraft (2003).

# Point Map
I started this project by looking at the Scottish witch trials in the broadest form I could think of, through mapping where each of the accused resided. For this, I wanted to only map cases that specifically had folkloric features related to fairies in hopes of observing any geographical trends that may differ from those accused as a whole. As both a point of reference and a source of location data for the accused, I turned to [another more recent GIS project](https://witches.is.ed.ac.uk/) dedicated to mapping those mentioned in the Survey of Scottish Witchcraft Database. I queried the database for cases that had preestablished "fairy" characteristics, but also queried the attached folk and case notes with a selection of related words according to the [database's glossary](http://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.glossary#glossary) to ensure no cases were missed due to other data being misentered or unintentionally overlooked. From these queries, I was able to compile a list of individuals whose accusations were accompanied by elements of fairy lore, and with this list, I was then able to locate where each resided by searching their name in the [Wikidata](https://w.wiki/6rX) knowledge base generated and made available by the aforementioned project.

As soon as I had each point plotted on a map, the cluster of those accused located in the Scottish Lowlands immediately stood out to me. While this result corresponded to the [existing map that shows the residences of all those accused of witchcraft](https://witches.is.ed.ac.uk/timeline/), because I chose to look at cases specifically relating to fairies, I anticipate a slight skew towards the accused residing in the Highlands. When initially gathering sources for this project, many-- such as William Collins' *An Ode on Popular Superstitions of the Highlands of Scotland*-- seemed to indicate that the Highlands were where folklore was the most believed in and a more significant part of daily life. Perhaps the significance of the Highlands' in folk literature was due to its beauty and sparse population creating a sense of mysticism, but it may also be that this strong belief of folklore associated with the Highlands superseded the belief in diabolism that was heavily associated with witchcraft elsewhere, resulting in fewer accusations of witchcraft in overall. When clicking through the cases located in the Highlands, only that of Jonet Reid mentions any aspect of diabolism-- the others primarily discuss unusual methods of healing and divination, and at their worst, instances of maleficium. Upon researching this, my line of thinking seems to be corroborated in [Thomas Brochard's article on Scottish Witchcraft in the Highlands](https://muse-jhu-edu.proxy.library.carleton.ca/article/583082#f124-text) during the period of 1563 to 1660, which states that the widespread nature and use of "traditional" magic in the Highlands often led to what would be seen as the work of demons in other regions being attributed to fairies or the unpredictable "evil eye" rather than witchcraft, and these misfortunes were even often countered with folk magic, religion, or ritual as opposed to legal means.

"But then what happened in the Lowlands?" I thought to myself after learning this. I initially thought that perhaps the situation in the Lowlands was opposite to its Northern counterpart-- those living in this more densely populated area of Scotland, many in the "modern" setting of the city, had dwindling belief in the existence of fairies and rather "rediscovered" them to be demonic beings considering their believed ability to perform acts ranging from harmless mischief to massive storms should they be wronged. In some ways, I was correct in this assumption, but of course, there's more to it. My research into the Lowlands quickly brought me to the infamous book *[Daemonologie](http://www.gutenberg.org/files/25929/25929-pdf.pdf)*, written by the equally infamous James VI of Scotland. The monarchy of Scotland operated primarily in the Central Lowlands with Edinburgh as its capital, thus living in this central belt during the Early Modern period meant a life of tumult as the Scottish Reformation took hold, leading to both religious and political conflict. James VI was appointed king of Scotland in 1579, years after the Scottish Witchcraft Act of 1563 was put in place, and paid little attention to the crime of witchcraft until the North Berwick trials in 1590-- the first large-scale persecution of witchcraft in Scotland-- which he both attend and fell victim to the accused's magic and malice. It was likely this incident that spurred James VI to write *Daemonologie* as his concern about the threat of witches grew; as a Calvinist, he opens the book appealing to fellow protestants by encouraging witch-hunting as an important part of a Christian society such as that which Scotland had been established as. Although I've read excerpts from this book before, upon closer reading I discovered that James VI addresses "phairies" in his study, describing them as "one of the sortes of illusiones that was rifest in the time of Papistrie" (pg 57) who acted as demonic spirits that transported and prophesied through the power of the Devil for those who they served. Not only does this singular section implicate the papacy as consorting with demons, it demonizes fairies and their related magic as something necessary to condemn. He further affirms the associations of fairies with demons and cautions against any admirable views of them that may derive from traditional folklore when answering the question of who fairies may appear to:

> "They may do to both, to the innocent sort, either to affraie
them, or to seeme to be a better sorte of folkes nor vncleane
spirites are, and to the Witches, to be a cullour of safetie for
them, that ignorant Magistrates may not punish them for it, as I
told euen now. But as the one sorte, for being perforce troubled
with them ought to be pittied, so ought the other sorte (who may
bee discerned by their taking vppon them to Prophesie by them,)
That sorte I say, ought as seuerely to be punished as any other
Witches, and rather the more, that that they goe dissemblingly
to woorke"

*Daemonologie* was first published in 1597 and quickly became the standard reference for knowledge on witchcraft in Scotland, shaping both the public perception and legal conduct relating to this diabolical trade. Fairies *were* now commonly seen as demons thus an incident that may once have been attributed to fairies was now considered to be an act of diabolism and maleficium-- the two ingredients that often made a witch-- and must be punished as severely as possible. Yet these beliefs mostly managed to contain themselves to the Lowlands with little spread to the Highlands, and this was likely due the widely disperse population and unpredictable terrain as shown on the base map used for this visualisation that made the dissemination of any literature or knowledge difficult. Ideas that formed during the Scottish Reformation were slow to spread into the Highlands for this same reason, to the point where those who inhabited the area were described as being "void of the knawledge and feir of God" (Hunter, pg. 28), and thus in a way, demonized as a people. As "wild savageis", James VI sought to tame the Highlands through statues aiming to abolish Gaelic and the folkloric beliefs that remained strong there. As expected, many of those residing in the Highlands rejected the anglicization that was being enforced by the Lowlands, and a part of this was likely rejecting the demonization of their long-standing cultural beliefs and ways of living that involved fairies as a part of nature and daily life. The divide between those accused of witchcraft with folkloric practices in the Highlands versus the Lowlands as seen on this map not only represents a difference in populations and geography, but also a cultural rife in Scotland that formed between tradition and religion during the Early Modern period.

# Choropleth


This map divides the same data that was used for the point map into broader regions—the deeper the colour, the greater the number of accused witches who resided in the area. While this map is not precisely historically accurate because it divides Scotland into its 32 council areas rather than the 34 historic counties or shires, I still found it useful for looking broadly at the number of those accused by region. Compared to the point map it seems to paint a somewhat different picture of where most of those accused of witchcraft with folkloric case elements resided. On the point map, the central belt of the Scottish lowlands seemed to be where cases concentrated, but when looking at this map, you can't help but immediately notice the prominent red splotch that is Aberdeenshire. Only three of the accused seemed to be located in the city, whereas beyond the central city walls there are 24 more cases disbursed throughout the region. Many of the cases appear to be from the late 16th century, [and a number of works](https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/abs/10.3366/nor.2001.0003) by historian Julian Goodare indicate that there was a witchcraft panic originating in Aberdeenshire in 1597,  which aligns with what the data shows. This also aligns with the year *Daemonologie* was published, and in combination with the well-documented trials recorded in Aberdeenshire at this time, the influence that King James VI’s publication may have had on these cases lingers. This region borders on the Highlands, so naturally it very likely shared some of the more traditional beliefs that were found there as locals and travellers intermingled. The cases of Aberdeenshire from this time period tend to have folk healing elements, with the specific fairy elements of a case often being directly associated with a devilish form, and spells or “cantripis” uttered in Gaelic (Henderson, 153). While *Daemonologie* may or may not have been the trigger for the witchhunts in Aberdeenshire that began in 1597, it certainly increased awareness about the apparent demonic dangers of what were once considered cultural beliefs, and those who did not conform with James VI’s newly established ideologies and continued to perform acts that could be associated with folklore and fairy encounters became something damning that could result in persecution. Should the fairy beliefs of the Highlands have come under the scrutiny of *Daemonologie*, they likely would've looked similar to the Aberdeenshire trials.

Looking beyond the Lowlands going all the way north, another curious occurrence I noted situated itself in the Scottish isles. Due to the fact that I couldn't consistently find a regional map or population data for the time period being studied, this map only accounts for the number of accused rather than the number of accused in relation to area or population of each region; yet, this lack of calculated proportionally led me to notice that the number of those accused as witches throughout the vast Highlands was equal to the number of those accused on the much smaller Orkney Islands. Referencing the details of the point map, I observed that all but one case occurred prior to 1616, and, upon researching this, I discovered that in 1615 Orkney was annexed to the crown following the execution of the Stewart lineage of earls who previously controlled the islands (Willumsen pg. 157). This meant that Scottish law was swiftly enacted across Orkney, and while there are no explicit mentions of diabolism in these cases, each mention practice of superstitions or elements of folk healing which King James VI warned about in *Daemonologie*, the resulting trials similar to those in Aberdeenshire. Through transference of land, once again do the fears of the Lowlands encroached upon the tradition of the Highlands.


# Folk Notes TM
Within the database, there was a central column titled "Folk Notes" in which any notes discussing the folkloric elements of a case could be attached to the accused individual. I was interested in seeing if there were any broader folkloric themes within the database that may prove relevant to my research, so I gathered all of the "folk notes" added into the database and from them used [topic modelling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topic_model) to generate 15 "themes" associated with this data. I then modelled these themes against the database's timeline via a streamline graph, as shown, to looked at their significance across the period during which the Scottish witchhunts occurred.

Topics generated tended to fall into the categories of healing, malice, fears, rituals, and folklore, and when plotted the resulting visual primarily revealed that the folkloric aspects of witchcraft in Scotland remained relatively consistent throughout the time period. There is a jump in the topic of "wax, image, kill", which likely occurred as a result of the [Paisley trials](http://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.caserecord&caseref=C%2FEGD%2F1773&search_type=searchpeople&search_string=lastname%3D%26firstname%3D%26residence%3D) where the those tried as witches were accused of "participating in 6 meetings where wax images with pins were used to enact murder and roasting the wax image was also used to kill and torment people," that involved "physical charmes made of bone, blood, and hair."

# Devil Appearence-- All manners of deviltry

When creating these visualizations, I opted to use data recorded about the manner and appearance of the devil from the entire database rather than restricting it to only cases with fairy and folkloric elements like I did for my map visualisations in hopes of finding broader trends in how the devil may have been perceived in cases throughout Scotland. At this point, I now knew about fairies and their presence as demonic spirits to a majority of the Early Modern Scottish population but questioned where the devil himself fell into this intertwining of folkloric and religious belief. That is until I happened upon the case notes of [Issobell Gowdie](http://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.caserecord&caseref=C/EGD/1558&search_string=date%3D%26enddate%3D%26char%3Dany%26char%5Fop%3DAND%26ritual%5Fobject%3Dany%26rit%5Fop%3DAND%26calendar%5Fcustom%3Dany%26cal%5Fop%3DAND%26non%5Fnatural%5Fbeing%3Dany%26nnb%5Fop%3DAND%26demonic%5Fpact%3Dany%26pact%5Fop%3DAND), where it is written that:

 "She linked the elves and the Devil by saying that the Devil gave elves instructions on how to use and make elfshot and that they fire the shot in the Devil's name."

 In her trial, the devil seemed to be regarded as an entity separate from fairies yet involved with them; since they were considered to be demonic beings it makes sense that the devil himself would rule over them, but could the opposite have been true as well? Was the construction of the devil shaped through folkloric beliefs about faeries, crafting him to resemble both a religious and mythical figure for the Scottish? The documentation for the Survey of Scottish Witchcraft Database stated that the table which includes the information needed for this analysis, WDB_DevilAppearance, should be relabelled with "Non-natural" beings rather than specifically the devil because they are unsure if the descriptions provided are meant to specifically reference the devil; regardless, I feel that looking at the contents of this table when thinking about the devil could still give valuable context as to where the devil is situated within traditional folklore and the Scottish witchhunts.

 The first visualisation yielded unsurprising results when looking at the "type" of being noted as appearing to the accused. Overwhelmingly, this being was male or simply described as a "devil", and the third most common form this being took was an animal-- very direct in its given context. Further intrigue comes when looking at what makes up the remaining larger proportions of this circle packing, where fairy and spirit-- two terms often used interchangeably in Scottish accounts of witchcraft-- are featured prominently. Yet despite all this, the result of this analysis that surprised me the most was the fourth most prominent "type" being "female". The devil even outside of the context of witchcraft is most commonly cast as a masculine figure, so I was intrigued by the fact that female appeared so frequently; in my search for answers about how this seemingly unusual result came to be, I turned to the next visualization I died on the more detailed "text" providing fuller descriptions of the beings recorded in this table.

 When looking at the largest circles, nothing immediately stood out to me as providing an answer to my question of how the devil was characterized as female. The descriptor of "green" denoted nature but often was associated fairies due to their association with the natural world, indicating a potential connection between the devil as master of nature, which could hold true whether the devil was seen in his religious embodiment or as a mythic creature overseeing the fair folk. The question of "what animal?" that may have been pondered when looking at the previous visualization of "type" of being is quickly answered with the prominence of the "cat" and "dog" circles. The singular more prominent word I was unfamiliar with was "antiochia", which also went undefined in the database's glossary. [In her writings about the appearance of the devil](http://search.ebscohost.com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=252506&site=ehost-live), Joyce Miller, one of the database's creators, states that "Antiochia" was, in fact, a female devil, known as the "gentle wife of the Devil." Miller notes that it is she who makes up a majority of "female" mentions in the database, but also that all mentions of her come from a singular trial involving 21 individual that occurred in 1697. It could be speculated that given the description of "gentle", Antiochia may be meant to represent the Queen of Elphane (Fairyland) in this scenario with the devil acting as king, or a goddess-like figure resembling pre-Christian pagan deities that held ties to Scottish folklore, but ultimately she remains a mystery.


# Fairy elements

To create this collection of simple plots, I first calculated the number of times each term occurred in their given column from the "WDB_Elf_FairyElements" table, and additionally, I attached each case mentioned in this table with their noted "cause of malice" from the "WDB_Malice" table in hopes of finding additional links to witchcraft and its good neighbours. I expected the results of ritual objects to heavily feature items of the "natural" world such as plants and water, and although the charted results did not give much significance to plant matter, the most frequently occurring ritual object used in fairy-related cases was water. Traditionally, bodies of water we thought to be locations where fairies tended to dwell, and building upon this, there are also numerous cases where the accused stated that they learned the water-based healing practices that led to their persecution after visiting fairies (Dalyell, 538). A note from [the case of Issobell Haldane](http://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.caserecord&caseref=C/EGD/935&search_type=searchpeople&search_string=lastname%3D%26firstname%3D%26residence%3D) states that:
"She confessed to using special water.  She washed a sick child and asked for healing in the name of the father, son and holy ghost.  Then cast the bairns shirt in the burn.  She was nearly able to transfer the disease, but she spilt some water and it didn't work.  She was asked if she met fairies, she answered yes, 10 years prior.  She claimed that she stayed in a fairy hill for three days -Thursday till Sunday.  Met with a man with a grey beard.  She made 3 cakes, out of 9 handfuls of meal gotten from 9 different women.  She collected well water for healing. Sharg - tiny ill-thriving creature, probably a changeling."

Beyond ritual and practice, witchcraft as a crime also seems to overlap with fairy lore, which was a result that surprised me. Before charting the data related to cause of malice, because so many of the cases I had studied prior were related to folk healing I hypothesized that "Failed healing" would be the most significant cause behind accusations of witchcraft; instead, I was met with witches that embodied fairies in their supposed crimes rather than just distantly connecting to them. In popular thought, fairies were often regarded in a neutral or even positive light due to their potential to commit small acts of kindness for those who pleased them, yet Scottish people still took great care to avoid angering them, doing things such as leaving bowls of water out inside the home for fairies to drink from in the night, as they were also known to be vengeful if wronged, with acts of retribution involving anything from stealing blood to catastrophic storms (Evans-Wentz, pg. 128). Accused witches who were associated with fairies seemed to echo this behaviour, using their magic for revenge against those who wronged them.

Despite these overlaps, when looking at the types of elf/fairy motifs specifically, I found it interesting that in these cases involving witches associated with fairy elements, the most common word that came from this column was "Thorn Tree"-- a type of tree that was traditionally believed to protect *against* fairies. Related to this phenomena, in the database I came across [the case of Jonet Morisone](http://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.caserecord&caseref=C/JO/3248&search_type=searchpeople&search_string=lastname%3D%26firstname%3D%26residence%3D), who:

"Used herbs to heal. Said the devil told her the fairies took John Glas's child's life, and that they intended to take Glas's life as well. Said that an illness was caused by the fairies - 'blasted by the fairies'. Asked what the difference was between shooting (elfshot) and blasting. Said there was no cure for shot and that blasting was a whirlwind that the fairies raised about their victim but that it could be healed with herbs or charms."

In this case, Morisone seems to believe and be aware of the existence of fairies, but does not associate with them and rather acts against them in her healing of fairy blasts. Her description of fairies contributes to their demonization by indicating that they are in fact associates of the devil who, although seemingly operating separately from him, allow him to see their evil deeds. This denunciation of fairies by Morisone combined with a ward against them being the most frequent motif related to them in cases related to fairies within the database reveals that while some witches claimed to learn their practice from the fair folk, others may have had stronger beliefs during this time of reformation that led to fairies being demonized and practitioners of deviltry just as they were, and thus fairies could be used as an alternative demonic source that misfortune could be attributed to and those whom the Scottish people should take precautions against.


# Acknowledgements

I firstly would like to thank my professor for HIST4101A: Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe, Dr. David Dean, for giving me the opportunity to create this site and indulge my interests in both data visualisation and folklore. I would also like to thank the creators of [the Survey of Scottish Witchcraft Database](http://www.shca.ed.ac.uk/Research/witches/history.html), as well as [those who worked on the extension of this project in 2019](https://witches.is.ed.ac.uk/about) to geographically situate the individuals recorded in the database, for without their hard work this project would not have been possible. Finally, I would like to thank my partner Adam for all of his technical support when it came to building the website; he may dislike web development but his help with routing was invaluable.

# Primary Sources

Kirk, Robert, and Andrew Lang. *The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns & Fairies: A Study in Folk-lore & Psychical Research*. London: David Nutt, 1893.

James I, King of England, 1566-1625. *Daemonologie: In Forme of a Dialogue, Divided into Three Bookes*. Edinburgh: Printed by Robert Walde-grave, Printer to the Kings Majestie, 1597.

Collins, William. *An Ode on Popular Superstitions of the Highlands of Scotland*. London: J. Bell, 1788.

Dennestone, Walter. *Mormonostolismos, sive Lamiarum vestitus; A Poem on the King and Queen of Fairy.* Edinburgh: Wartons, 1690.

“A Witch Holding a Plant in One Hand and a Fan in the Other. Woodcut, ca. 1700-1720.” London: c. 1720.
Wellcome Library no 603070i. https://search.wellcomelibrary.org/iii/encore/record/C__Rb1603070?lang=eng.

# Secondary Sources

Gregor, Walter. "Stories of Fairies from Scotland." *The Folk-Lore Journal* 1, no. 2 (1883): 55-58. Accessed December 31, 2020. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1252584.

Canon J. A. MacCulloch. "The Mingling of Fairy and Witch Beliefs in Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century Scotland." *Folklore* 32, no. 4 (1921): 227-44. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1255201.

Larner, Christina. *Enemies of God: The Witch-hunt in Scotland*. London: Chatto and Windus, 1981.

Goodare, Julian. "The Framework for Scottish Witch-Hunting in the 1590s." *The Scottish Historical Review* 81, no. 212 (2002): 240-50. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25529649.

Goodare, Julian. "Boundaries of the Fairy Realm in Scotland". In *Airy Nothings*, Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill, 2014. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004258235_009.

Willumsen, Liv Helene. Witches of the North. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill, 2013. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004252929.

J. Goodare, L. Martin, and J. Miller. *Witchcraft and Belief in Early Modern Scotland*. Palgrave Historical Studies in Witchcraft and Magic. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. http://search.ebscohost.com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=252506&site=ehost-live.

Hutton, Ronald. "The Making of the Early Modern British Fairy Tradition." *The Historical Journal* 57, no. 4 (12, 2014): 1135-1156. http://dx.doi.org.proxy.library.carleton.ca/10.1017/S0018246X14000351. https://proxy.library.carleton.ca/login?url=https://www-proquest-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/scholarly-journals/making-early-modern-british-fairy-tradition/docview/1622899582/se-2?accountid=9894.

Henderson, Lizanne, and Edward J. Cowan. *Scottish Fairy Belief: A History*. Michigan: Tuckwell Press, 2001.

Brochard, Thomas. "Scottish Witchcraft in a Regional and Northern European Context: The Northern Highlands, 1563–1660." *Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft* 10, no. 1 (2015): 41-74. 10.1353/mrw.2015.0003.

Wilby, Emma. "The Witch's Familiar and the Fairy in Early Modern England and Scotland." *Folklore* 111, no. 2 (2000): 283.

Henderson, Lizanne. “The Witches of Bute” in *Historic Bute: Land and People*. Ed. Anna Ritchie, 2012.

Hunter, James. *Last of the Free: A History of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland*. Edinburgh: Random House, 2011.

Dalyell, Sir John Graham. *The Darker Superstitions of Scotland: Illustrated from History and Practice*. Edinburgh: Waugh and Innes, 1834.

Evans-Wentz, Walter Yeeling. *The Fairy-faith in Celtic Countries*. London:	H. Frowde, 1911.

Hall, Alaric. "Getting Shot of Elves: Healing, Witchcraft and Fairies in the Scottish Witchcraft Trials." *Folklore* 116, no. 1 (2005): 19-36. Accessed December 31, 2020. http://www.jstor.org/stable/30035236.


# Other

- [Here is a link]() to an assortment of data and notes I compiled during the research process for this project

- [Here is the link]() to this project's repository on GitHub

- Photo on home page is [Quiétude](https://www.flickr.com/photos/kenny_barker/22318747333/in/photolist-A1eq1v-YNC8ps-296pvST-SeSL2u-PNG1pJ-ThTBdh-23NSniE-TYdwRK-S2tDd4-ThTAR5-D5KQjN-YZ3V58-2ekieez-24N4a22-28ZnNms-27Ma1Qh-Zu9fJy-29MLzkH-29Sbcdt-psKZh9-Gb2scy-24vJKkg-8F5fGi-JndbWw-29KvDdD-ZxWgtE-G4mBvE-qjkfEM-Nnk4tQ-26m7EKz-Loe76q-24yyYmP-28YUrUW-M9wa7v-YnixSU-ZK7jjV-VmsxBr-KLR93Z-2cd3uVP-27s4jwC-26CPLQh-YGYGTA-Ywuic3-26v4d1k-TjQASA-dYHAkX-G6YaKg-9ScHGY-LFRKEC-pzck9h/) by Kenneth Barker

- When doing this project, I found [this article](https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/abs/10.3366/jshs.2017.0200?journalCode=jshs) by Stuart Macdonald a useful article to take into consideration when shaping my observations.
